Hello and thanks for your post. I’m sorry you’ve had a positive FIT test result and are waiting to be assessed by the colorectal team. The FIT test checks for hidden blood in the stool sample. When the levels are elevated it indicates blood was found and further tests are usually needed to find out more. There can be many reasons for blood in the stools and a range of bowel conditions that can cause the bleeding but something more serious such as cancer does need to be ruled out. The specialist you will see at the hospital will go through what is going to happen next and what to expect. A colonoscopy (a camera to examine the bowel) is usually the next test following a positive FIT test to be able to take a look at the bowel more closely to identify any abnormal areas that may be responsible for the bleeding. I hope you know more soon and that everything turns out to be okay. Give us a ring if you would like to talk anything over. The number to call is Freephone 0808 800 4040 and the lines are open from 9am till 5pm Monday to Friday.
I'm sorry to hear that you have some ongoing health issues. It's good to hear that your colonoscopy didn't give any cause for concern. I'm sure it was a relief to have had some good news during your procedures. We know that for many people this period of uncertainty and waiting for results can be difficult. It's natural to feel anxious about the results of your biopsy. You can't change the outcome of those tests, all you can do in the meantime is try to remain positive and take good care of yourself. If you'd like to talk things through with one of our team of nurses you're welcome to call them on 0808 800 4040, Monday to Friday 9 am to 5 pm. I'm sure they will be happy to listen and offer any advice and support that they can. Hopefully, you won't have to wait too long for your results. Let us know how you get on. 
There is a lot of logic in what you are asking, but I'm afraid I am not sure about the ins and outs of everything that can and can't be seen on a CT colonoscopy. However,  I do think there is reassurance to be had in the fact that the report only described polyps and nothing else was mentioned, so try and take this on board. Bowel polyps aren't cancer but some bowel polyps go on to develop into cancer over time.  I suppose the last word about these polyps will probably have to come from a tissue examination after they have been removed, but I don't think you should be thinking the worst although I appreciate that having tests can trigger a lot of stress and worry. I am not sure who you spoke to about the CT colonoscopy report, but it may help to go through it again with your doctor. I hope you find out more about your situation soon and that things improve for you soon with the pain. If you want to talk anything over please give us a call on 0808 800 4040, we are around weekdays from 9-5. 
Hello and thanks for your post. I'm sorry you found your colonoscopy painful despite having sedation and painkillers. It's not unusual to take several biopsies during this procedure, and most people get their results within two or three weeks. I hope everything turns out to be okay.
Hello and welcome to the community. I'm sorry you still haven't heard anything about your appointment. Sadly a lot of people are having to wait longer than usual due to the pandemic backlogs but if you're worried, you could get in touch with your GP and see if they're able to chase this up for you. Hopefully some of our members who have been in a similar position will offer their thoughts and advice to you soon but in the meantime, we'll have our fingers crossed your appointment comes through soon. All the best,
I'm sorry to hear about your Mum's diagnosis but it's really good to know that she has a treatment plan in place. I hope that things go well for her. It's understandable that you may be feeling anxious about your own health and if this now increases your risk of developing cancer. You may find it helpful to have a look at the information on our website about the risks and causes of bowel cancer. If you're worried then do chat with your GP who will be best placed to support you. Alternatively, you're welcome to chat with one of our team of nurses on 0808 800 4040, Monday to Friday 9 am to 5 pm. Best wishes
Hello and thank you for getting back to us, It is difficult to me to say exactly what is going on, but I can appreciate that this is a very stressful time for you and your husband because of the uncertainty. I think it might be a good idea for you and your husband to contact the doctor again and talk through the current situation so that you feel you understand it better. The FIT test, as Julia my colleague has said above, measures the amount of blood in the poo, it does not measure the amount of a potential bowel cancer. Other tests are needed to decide if they think it is a cancer. Take care, and if you want to talk this over then do give us a call on Freephone 0808 800 4040 and the lines are open from 9am till 5pm Monday to Friday.
Welcome to Cancer Chat, although I am sorry for the reason that brings you here. When I read your post I thought of another post where another member, @Malstan ‍ was looking to chat with someone in a similar situation so I thought I might tag them here and perhaps you two can have a chat? Also, feel free to ring our cancer nurses if you'd like to ask them a few questions. They are available to take your call Monday - Friday between 9a.m - 5p.m on this number: 0808 400 4040. Best wishes,
Welcome to our forum! I am sorry to hear about these bowel issues you have been experiencing. I am not sure myself what the CT scan would have shown but this is something you could perhaps ask your GP when you give them a call tomorrow. I think if you are worried about your symptoms, you are right to call the GP who will be in the best position to advise you and tell you more about your bowel symptoms. I hope that you will also hear from others who have had similar symptoms and that they will be along to share their experience with you. Best wishes and best of luck with your doctor's appointment tomorrow,
I'm sorry to hear you have noticed some bleeding that is causing anxiety and concern, but I'm afraid no-one on this forum going to be able to say if there is anything the matter.Most things are easily explained, and are not anything serious, but it would be good to contact your GP and organise a telephone conversation. They will then bring you into the surgery if they need to see you face to face. There are various gynaecological reasons for vaginal bleeding, so it makes sense to get this checked out by your GP. 
Unfortunately I do not know what this calprotectin result means other than inflammation within the bowel. This inflammation can be caused by a number of things like irritable bowel, Crohns or cancer. so the doctors would take this test result, plus any symptoms and decide to do follow up tests to get more information.I've placed here some information from an NHS hospital about this blood test. Do remember that anyone who gets back you on the forum will be discussing things from their own personal experience of the situation and this may not be the same for you. It is so difficult when waiting for answers and results. But trying to keep busy each day so your mind is distracted may help time pass. Take care, and I hope you know more about your situation soon. 
At least now you have a better understanding of when the scan and colonoscopy will be carried out.  However, I know that this could still be a worry especially if you are in pain. Please know that if you are very worried or anxious that this could make your pain feel worse. In the meantime you could speak with your GP about how you are coping and the pain you have.  You may find talking with friends and family can help you cope better.  Also trying to keep to a normal daily pattern as this could help keep your mind of this. Easier said than done sometimes. I am sorry to hear about your dad dying of bowel cancer and I can appreciate that this could worry you about your risk.  For most families bowel cancer is not an inherited risk but do mention it to the specialist doctor when you see them. You may find it helpful to talk things through with one of the nurses on our helpline.  The number to call is Freephone 0808 800 4040 and the lines are open from 9am till 5pm Monday to Friday.
I'm sorry to hear about the problems your mum has been having.  I'm afraid we are unable to tell you what is causing her symptoms, but can offer you some information. We have some information about bowel cancer symptoms here: https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/bowel-cancer/symptoms A positive FIT can be worrying, this looks for traces of blood in a sample of poo.  It can be a sign of cancer but it can also be caused by lots of other conditions.  You can find out more about this here https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/bowel-cancer/getting-diagnosed/tests/FIT It does sound as if she is having some investigations done.  It can be really hard waiting for tests and results, some people find that keeping themselves busy with their usual routine, or seeing friends and family can be helpful. You may find it helpful to talk things through with one of the nurses onFreephone 0808 800 4040.  The lines are open from 9am till 5pm Monday to Friday.
I am sorry to hear about you needing to have a colonoscopy and for the pain you experienced. Everyone is different when it comes to tests and it is always important to let the team involved in your care to know how you are feeling during a test or procedure so they can stop or try other things to make things more manageable. Do talk through this experience with the hospital and give the department your feedback so they can talk through what happened with you to help you process this. Wishing you all the best moving forward
I'm sorry to hear that you've been having these issues. Your bowel habits might never return to how they were before your surgery but hopefully things will settle a bit more for you. After treatment it can help to experiment with your diet to find out which causes more a problem with loose stools for you. Some people find keeping a food diary for a few weeks to see if certain fruits and vegetable make this symptom worse.  Making changes to your diet can help to slow bowel movements or make them more solid and your doctor might be able to prescribe medicines to help you open your bowels less frequently and keep your stools less loose. You can read more about diet on Bowel Cancer UK's website by clicking here. You may also find it useful to mention the symptoms to your doctor, they may be able to give you some advice on how to manage the problem or refer you to a specialist nurse for help and advice. 
They will usually take biopsies as standard practice during a bowel scope procedure, to check any tissue samples taken, and send them off for laboratory analysis. The pathologist will look at the sample of cells taken, to see if there are various bowel conditions, or whether the tissue sample cells has abnormal or cancer cells present. I hope that this helps, and that you get to find out more soon,
Hello there and thanks for posting. Hopefully others will pop on here and share their stories with you but do bear in mind symptoms and abnormal test results can be caused by so many different things and most won't be cancer. I think for now you need to try and trust your doctors judgement but of course let them or your midwife know about any further problems you may be having so they can assess you. As your GP has already said calprotectin levels are often raised in inflammatory bowel disease so hopefully something like irritable bowel syndrome is causing the change in your bowel habits. It is my understanding that whilst a colonoscopy can be risky in pregnancy and cause early onset of labour or miscarriage these risks for each person need to be weighed up. If the symptoms continue or worsen, I am sure the doctors will re consider the colonoscopy to find out what is going on but I think they would rather this be in the 2nd or 3rd trimester. I hope this helps and the rest of your pregnancy is a healthy one.
A warm welcome to the Cancer Chat community Becky although I'm sorry for the reason you're joining us and for the worry your calprotectin results are causing. Hopefully some of our members who have also had high numbers will offer their support and advice to you soon but if you'd like to discuss your concerns with one of our cancer nurses then do give them a call. They're available on 0808 800 4040, Monday - Friday between 9a.m - 5p.m and will do all they can to put your mind at ease. Fingers crossed all goes well at your gastro appointment and your symptoms start to get better soon.
The FIT test is designed to pick up hidden blood in your stool.  There, can be lots of reasons for blood in the stool only one of which is cancer.  Most people with a positive fit test turn out not to have cancer.  Try not to worry too much, you are doing the right thing getting things checked out, but there is a very good chance that this will turn out not to be cancer.
Hello there and thanks for posting. I am sorry to hear you are undergoing some tests and appreciate this must be a difficult time for you. Unfortunately no one can say what this polyp may be here or anywhere else until the results are in so try and hang in there for now. Polyps ( even large ones) won't always be cancer but samples ( biopsies) of them need to be examined closely under a microscope to be sure. If the doctor has some suspicions they may arrange some more scans but even then it doesn't mean it is cancer or that if it is it has spread, so please don't over think things until you have all the facts from your doctor. I hope you know more soon but do get back if you have more questions or just want to talk. We also have the nurse helpline on 0808 800 4040 Mon-Fri 9-5.
I'm sorry to hear that you are having these symptoms.  Seeing blood in your poo can be very worrying, but it can be for many reasons other than cancer, such as bowel inflammation, polyps (harmless growths), piles and sometimes no cause is ever found for it. There is lots of information here about different reasons for having blood in your poo, which you may find helpful.  Bowel cancer in someone your age is very unusual, it is more likely as we get older (over 60).  But it's a good idea to make a GP appointment if you have a change in bowel habits or bleeding from your bottom, as they will be able to examine you and rule out different causes for the blood. I hope you get some answers from your GP. If you would like to talk to someone about this you can call us on  Freephone 0808 800 4040 and talk to one of our nurses.  The lines are open from 9am till 5pm Monday to Friday.
Hello I am sorry to learn about how distressed you are feeling.  It is always difficult waiting for the results of tests and I am sure many people would describe similar feelings to you in the same circumstances.  But don't jump to conclusions about what might be the cause of your problems.  Calprotectin tends to be raised in conditions that lead to inflamation in the bowel.  Although it can sometimes be raised in bowel cancer it is most commonly used to try and distinguish between Irritable Bowel Syndrome and other diseases that are not cancer but cause inflammation of the lining of the bowel.  So just because this is raised in your case does not necessarily mean you have bowel cancer and it could very easily be something else that is causing your problems. As this is a cancer forum, it might be best not to linger too much on here right now, it is quite possible that you don't have cancer, but chatting on here will keep it front of mind and is likely to increase your anxiety rather than reducing it. I hope you are able to get things sorted out soon
Bowel cancer means cancer that starts in the large bowel (colon) and the back passage (rectum). It is also known as colorectal cancer. Your treatment depends on where the cancer starts in your bowel. The bowel is split into 2 parts - the small bowel and the large bowel. The large bowel includes the colon, the rectum and the bowel opening (anus).  This section is about colon and rectal cancer. We have separate sections about anal cancer and small bowel cancer. 
What is bowel cancer? Bowel cancer is also called colorectal cancer. It affects the large bowel, which is made up of the colon and rectum. Cancer is when abnormal cells start to divide and grow in an uncontrolled way. The cells can grow into surrounding tissues or organs, and may spread to other areas of the body. 
The bowel makes up a part of the digestive system. It’s split into the small and large bowel. The large bowel includes the: colon, back passage (rectum), bowel opening (anus). This section is about colon and rectal cancer. We have separate sections about anal cancer and small bowel cancer. There are two main parts to the bowel, the small bowel and the large bowel. The food we eat ends up in the large bowel where water and some nutrients are absorbed leaving waste. This passes through the bowel before leaving the body. The most common type of bowel cancer affects the large bowel, which includes the colon and the back passage. Large bowel cancer is also sometimes called colorectal cancer. Cancer starts when something goes wrong in a cell and it starts growing uncontrollably to form a tumour. More than 9 out of 10 people who develop bowel cancer in the UK are over the age of 50. Your risk of developing bowel cancer may be higher if you have a strong family history of bowel cancer, or you have a genetic condition, or you gave a bowel condition such as colitis. The good news is that more than half of all bowel cancers could be prevented through lifestyle changes. These include stopping smoking, being physically active - at least 30 minutes exercise five times a week, keeping to a healthy weight, eating smaller and fewer portions of red and processed meat, choosing wholegrain foods and at least five portions of fruit and veg a day, and cutting down on alcohol. The less you drink the lower the risk. If you do drink, try and stick within the government guidelines, that is no more than 14 units a week. The UK has a bowel cancer screening programme for older men and women which aims to find cancer early. Those registered with a GP are sent a kit to test for bowel cancer every two years. You can find out more information about bowel cancer screening on the Cancer Research UK website.
Where does bowel cancer start? Bowel cancer starts in the lining of the large bowel (colon) or back passage (rectum). Where your bowel cancer is located will affect the treatment that you might have. For example, the treatment for colon cancer can be different to the treatment for rectal cancer.
Colon cancer: The colon is the first part of the large bowel. It is about 5 feet long and is divided into 4 sections. Cancer can develop in any of these. The parts of the colon are the: Ascending colon – runs up the right side of the abdomen. It is connected to the small intestine by a section of bowel called the caecum. Transverse colon – runs across the body from right to left, under the stomach. Descending colon – runs down the left side of the abdomen. Sigmoid colon – an 'S' shaped bend that joins the descending colon to the back passage.
Rectal cancer: Rectal cancer starts in the last part of the large bowel (the back passage or rectum). This part of the bowel stores poo (stool) until it is ready to be passed out of the body. Rectal cancer is also called cancer of the rectum.
Anal cancer: Anal cancer starts in your anus which is the opening at the very end of your large bowel. Poo leaves your body through your anus. 
Cancer of the small bowel: The small bowel is between the tummy (stomach) and large bowel.
If bowel cancer spreads: Bowel cancer can spread to another part of the body through the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is made up of lymph nodes, which are part of the body’s immune system. One of the first places bowel cancer spreads is to the lymph nodes in the tummy (abdomen). Bowel cancer can also spread to other parts of the body through the bloodstream. The liver is a common place for bowel cancer to spread because blood flows directly from the bowel to the liver. The cancer can also spread into the lung or bone but this is less common.
How common is bowel cancer? Around 42,900 people are diagnosed with bowel cancer in the UK each year. It is the 4th most common cancer in the UK.
Who gets bowel cancer: Both men and women can get bowel cancer. It is more common in older people. The risk of developing bowel cancer depends on many factors, including: age, family history, genetic conditions such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Lynch syndrome, ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, diet and lifestyle factors
Symptoms of bowel cancer: Symptoms of bowel cancer can include a change in your normal bowel habit or blood in your poo. They can also be symptoms for other conditions, but it’s important to see your doctor. Bowel cancer can start in the large bowel (colon cancer) or back passage (rectal cancer). It is also called colorectal cancer. Possible symptoms of bowel cancer
The symptoms of bowel (colorectal) cancer can include: bleeding from the back passage (rectum) or blood in your poo, a change in your normal bowel habit, such as looser poo, pooing more often or constipation, a lump that your doctor can feel in your back passage or tummy (abdomen), more commonly on the right side, a feeling of needing to strain in your back passage (as if you need to poo), even after opening your bowels, losing weight, pain in your abdomen or back passage, tiredness and breathlessness caused by a lower than normal level of red blood cells (anaemia)
Sometimes cancer can block the bowel. This is called a bowel obstruction. The symptoms include: cramping pains in the abdomen, feeling bloated, constipation and being unable to pass wind, being sick, A bowel obstruction is an emergency. You should see your doctor quickly or go to A&E at your nearest hospital if you think you have a bowel obstruction.
Blood in your poo: Blood in your poo (stools or faeces) can be a sign of bowel cancer. But it is often due to other causes. See your GP if you are worried about any symptoms that you think could be caused by cancer in the bowel. Most often, blood in the stool is from piles (haemorrhoids), especially if it is bright red, fresh blood. Piles are like swollen veins in the back passage. These veins are fragile and can easily get damaged when you have a poo, causing a little bleed.  Blood from higher up in the bowel doesn't look bright red. It goes dark red or black and can make your poo look like tar. This type of bleeding can be a sign of cancer higher up the bowel. Or it could be from a bleeding stomach ulcer for example.
It is important to go to your doctor if you have any bleeding and get checked. Your doctor won't think you are wasting their time. It’s very likely that you’ll have a rectal examination. This means the doctor puts a gloved finger into your back passage and feels for anything abnormal. Your doctor might send you to the hospital for further tests. Go to see your GP if you are worried about any of the symptoms mentioned above. Remember these symptoms can be caused by other conditions. Many of these are much less serious than cancer, such as piles (haemorrhoids), infections or inflammatory bowel disease. 
Risks and causes of bowel cancer: Your risk of developing bowel (colon and rectal) cancer depends on many things including age, genetics and lifestyle factors. Anything that can increase your risk of cancer is called a risk factor. Those that lower the risk are called protective factors. Having one or more risk factors doesn’t mean that you will definitely get bowel cancer. 
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Diet It is very difficult to research the link between diet and cancer. Scientists need to carry out very large studies to see which specific foods might reduce the risk of cancer, and which could raise the risk. The role of some parts of our diet remains unknown or uncertain. But we do know that some foods can definitely affect the risk of bowel cancer. Eating too much red and processed meat. Many studies have shown that eating lots of red and processed meat increases the risk of bowel cancer. It is estimated that around 13 out of 100 bowel cancer cases (around 13%)  in the UK are linked to eating these meats. Processed meat is any meat that has been treated to preserve it and/or add flavour - for example, bacon, salami, sausages, canned meat or chicken nuggets. And a portion is about 2 sausages or 3 slices of ham. The government recommends that people eating more than 90g of red and processed meat a day should reduce it to 70g or less. 70g is the cooked weight. This is about the same as  2 sausages. It might help to swap red meat for chicken or fish. Or use beans and pulses in meals instead of meat.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Eating too little fibre. Eating lots of fibre reduces your risk of bowel cancer. Eating too little fibre causes around 30 in 100 bowel cancer cases (around 30%) in the UK.  You can boost the fibre in your diet by choosing wholegrain versions of foods. To get more fibre in your diet try: swapping to brown rice, pasta or bread, swapping your snack to low calorie popcorn rather than crisps, choosing wholegrain breakfast cereals, eating more fruit and vegetables high in fibre, such as peas and raspberries
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Being overweight and obese. Obesity is a cause of bowel cancer. It is estimated that 11 out of 100 bowel cancers (11%) in the UK are linked to being overweight or obese. Obesity means being very overweight with a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or higher. And being overweight is a BMI of between 25 and 30. The risk of bowel cancer is higher in people who are obese compared to those who have a healthy BMI.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Exercise. Try to keep a healthy weight by being physically active and eating a healthy, balanced diet. There is strong evidence which shows that people who are more physically active have a lower risk of bowel cancer.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Smoking tobacco. 7 out of 100 bowel cancers (7%) in the UK are linked to smoking. The risk increases with the number of cigarettes smoked a day. It is never too late to stop smoking but the sooner you stop the better.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Alcohol increases the risk of bowel cancer. It has been estimated that around 6 out of 100 bowel cancers (around 6%) in the UK are linked to drinking alcohol.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Age, bowel cancer is more common in older people. More than 40 out of 100 bowel cancer cases (more than 40%) in the UK each year are diagnosed in people aged 75 or over.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Family history, your risk of bowel cancer is increased if you have a first degree relative diagnosed with bowel cancer. A first degree relative is a parent, brother or sister, son or daughter. The risk is increased further if you have more than one relative diagnosed with bowel cancer. Or you have a first degree relative diagnosed at a young age, for example, under the age of 45 years old. Talk to your GP if you think you have a family history of bowel cancer. They might refer you to a genetics clinic if appropriate. A geneticist carries out a detailed assessment and can confirm whether people need screening or genetic testing. Inherited or genetic conditions There are some rare inherited conditions or syndromes associated with certain gene changes. Family members have an increased risk of bowel cancer if they inherit these gene changes.  Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is one of these conditions. FAP is responsible for less than 1 in 100 cases (less than 1%) of all bowel cancers.  If left untreated, all individuals with this syndrome will almost certainly develop bowel cancer by their 40s. Specialists recommend that people with FAP have bowel surgery in their 20s. The surgeon usually removes the colon to prevent the development of bowel cancer. Another condition is Lynch syndrome, or hereditary non polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC). People with this gene fault have a higher risk of getting bowel cancer and other cancers. People with gene changes that increase bowel cancer risk might need screening more often than the general population.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are chronic bowel diseases causing inflammation in the bowel. Having either of these diseases for many years increases your risk of bowel cancer. 
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Previous cancer. You have an increased risk of developing another bowel cancer if you have already had a bowel cancer in the past. Your specialist will talk to you about how often you may need screening. You might have a slightly increased risk of getting bowel cancer if you have had another type of cancer in the past. This might be due to genetic changes or an effect of the treatment for the first cancer. In some cases, it may be due to shared risk factors such as smoking or being overweight.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Medical conditions: Diabetes - If you have diabetes, your pancreas doesn't make enough of a hormone called insulin. People with diabetes may have an increased risk of bowel cancer. We don't know why this is and scientists are looking into it. Gallstones - The risk of rectal cancer is increased in people with gallstones compared to those without. Also, people with gallstones have double the risk of developing polyps in the large bowel (colon) compared to those without gallstones. Acromegaly - People with acromegaly also have an increased risk of bowel cancer, although studies are still trying to find out why. Acromegaly is a condition where the pituitary gland produces too much growth hormone and causes an overgrowth of bones, especially in the face.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Benign polyps in the bowel - Growths in the bowel, called polyps are not cancerous. Certain types of polyps called adenomas can develop into cancer over a long period of time. In fact, most bowel cancers develop from an adenoma. Your risk of developing cancer depends on how many polyps you have, and how large they are.  Adenomas are quite common. Around a third of the population will have at least one polyp by age 60. But only a small fraction of adenomas develop into cancer and it takes years to happen.  The bowel cancer screening programmes in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland aim to find and remove polyps in the general population before they become cancerous.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Radiation - Around 2 in 100 cases (around 2%) of bowel cancer in the UK are linked to radiation exposure. Some of these cases are due to radiotherapy treatment for previous cancer. The rest are linked to radiation used in tests such as x-rays and CT scans (diagnostic radiation) and background radiation. 
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Infections - There is some evidence that the risk of bowel cancer is higher in people who have an infection called Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori). This is a type of bacteria which can cause stomach ulcers. This is a common infection which many people have. Most do not develop into cancer.
Risk factors for bowel cancer include: Other possible causes - Stories about potential causes are often in the media and it isn’t always clear which ideas are supported by evidence. There might be things you have heard of that we haven’t included here. This is because either there is no evidence about them or it is less clear.
Getting diagnosed - You usually start by seeing your GP. They will ask you about your general health and symptoms and will also examine you. This might include an examination of your back passage (rectum). Your doctor will then decide whether to do tests or refer you to a specialist.
Seeing your GP - You should see your doctor if you notice a change that isn't normal for you or if you have any of the possible signs and symptoms of cancer. Even if you're worried about what the symptom might be, don't delay seeing them. Your worry is unlikely to go away if you don't make an appointment. The symptom might not be due to cancer. But if it is, the earlier it's picked up the higher the chance of successful treatment. You won't be wasting your doctor's time. Try not to be embarrassed. What you tell your GP is confidential. Doctors are used to discussing intimate problems and will try to put you at ease.
Making a GP appointment - To make an appointment to see your GP you: can telephone your GP practice, book an appointment online through your GP practice website (if they have one), may be able to use the NHS App. Try different times of the day if it's difficult to get through by phone. It could be particularly busy at the beginning of the day. You don’t have to tell the receptionist what you want to see the doctor for, although sometimes it might help to explain your situation. You might be able to go in person to book an appointment at some GP practices. But at the moment most practices do not provide this service. It may help to see if your GP practice has a website, this will explain the best way to get an appointment. The receptionist at your GP’s practice may offer you a telephone or video appointment first. Your GP will ask you to make another appointment if they need to see you again. You may be asked to attend in person, especially if they need to examine you. The receptionist will give you a date and time for this. Accept a booked appointment, even if you think it’s a long time to wait. You could ask about cancellations if you are able to get to the practice at short notice. Do check that they have the right contact details for you, including your telephone number and email. 
Getting the most out of your GP appointment: When you see the doctor, it can be difficult to remember everything you want to say. These tips will help you get the most out of your appointment. Tips include Write down your symptoms including when they started, when they happen and how often you have them. Write down anything that makes them worse or better. Tell your GP if you are worried about cancer. Tell them if you have any family history of cancer. Take a friend or relative along for support - they could also ask questions and take notes to help you remember what the GP says. Ask the GP to explain anything you don’t understand. Ask the GP to write things down for you if you think it might help.
What happens during your GP appointment: Your doctor needs to build up a picture of what's going on. So they will ask you some questions. These include: what symptoms you have, when you get them, whether anything makes them better or worse. They will ask you about your general health and any other medical conditions you have.  During the appointment your doctor may want to examine you. You can ask for someone else to be in the room if you want, to act as a chaperone. This chaperone can be a friend or relative, or a trained health professional such as a practice nurse. They can be with you during the examination or throughout the appointment. If you would rather see a male or a female doctor it is worth asking when you book the appointment. Your GP may examine your back passage (rectum). This is called a rectal examination. They do this by putting a gloved finger into your back passage and feeling for any lumps or swelling. 
Questions you might want to ask your GP: Do I need to see a specialist? Is it urgent? When will I see them? Where will I see them? Will I find out about my appointments by post or telephone? Do I need tests? What will they involve? How long should I expect to wait? Where can I find out more about tests? Do I have to do anything in preparation for this test? When will I get the results and who will tell me? Your GP might not be able to answer all of your questions. They will tell you what they can at this point. Not knowing is difficult to cope with and can make you anxious. Speaking to a friend or relative about how you feel might help.
If your GP doesn't think you need any tests or a referral Can you explain why I don’t need to have tests or see a specialist? Is there anything I can do to help myself? Do I need to see you again? Who do I contact if my symptoms continue or get worse, especially during the night or at weekends?
Tests: Blood test. Your GP might arrange for you to have blood tests. You usually have these at your GP practice or your local hospital. Testing for blood in your poo Your GP might arrange a test that looks for tiny traces of blood in a sample of your poo. This is a test called FIT (Faecal Immunochemical Test).  You might have this test if you don’t have rectal bleeding, but you have unexplained symptoms which could be caused by bowel cancer. Your GP will refer you for further tests if you have abnormal FIT results. You might not need any further tests if your results are normal. But some people with normal results will need more tests because a normal FIT test doesn't always mean you don't have cancer. 
Other tests: Depending on your symptoms and test results, your GP can arrange hospital tests, such as: sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, CT colonography (virtual colonsocopy).
Referral to a specialist: Your GP should arrange for you to see a specialist if you have symptoms that could be due to bowel cancer. Depending on your symptoms and other factors, this might be an urgent referral. With an urgent referral you should see a specialist within 2 weeks. 
Seeing your GP: Most patients who see a GP do not have cancer and have symptoms due to a more minor condition. For some symptoms, your doctor may ask you to wait to see if the symptoms get better or respond to treatment, such as antibiotics. There are guidelines for GPs to help them decide who needs a referral.
When your GP should refer you. Your GP should refer you if: you are over 40, with unexplained weight loss and tummy (abdominal) pain, you are over 50, and have unexplained bleeding from your back passage (rectum), you are over 60, and have low iron levels in your blood (anaemia) or change in your bowel habit, your test results show hidden blood in your poo, you have a lump or swelling in your back passage or tummy (abdomen), you are under 50, with bleeding from your back passage, with either tummy pain, low iron levels or weight loss. If you do not have bleeding from your back passage, your GP should offer a test checking for hidden blood in your poo if: you are over 50, and have unexplained pain in your abdomen or weight loss, you are under 60, with changes to bowel habits or low iron levels, you are over 60, and have low iron levels.
UK referral guidelines. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) and Healthcare Improvement Scotland (HIS) produce guidelines for GPs in the UK. The guidelines help them decide who needs an urgent referral.
If you are still worried: Go back to your GP if your symptoms have not improved, are getting worse or are happening more often. If you feel your GP is not taking your symptoms as seriously as you'd like, print this page and take it along to the appointment. Ask your GP to explain why they think you should or shouldn’t have a referral.
Tests for bowel cancer: You might have one or more of these tests to find out the cause of your symptoms, or to find out the size of your cancer and whether it has spread. This tells you the stage of your cancer. Knowing the stage helps your doctor decide which treatment you need. 
Examination of your back passage: An examination of your back passage (rectum) involves your doctor feeling inside your rectum using their finger. This procedure is also called a digital rectal exam (DRE). Why you might have this. You might have a rectal examination to help work out the cause of your symptoms. What happens before the examination? It’s normal to feel a bit anxious about this test and it might be uncomfortable. But it usually only takes a few minutes and you shouldn’t feel any pain. Tell your doctor if you do. You can ask for a man or woman doctor if you’d prefer. Or you can have someone else in the room, such as a family member. During the examination. The doctor or nurse will ask you to take off your clothes on your lower half, including underwear. You’ll lie on your left hand side, with your knee’s brought up towards your chest. The doctor or nurse will put on gloves and then put lubricating gel on their finger. They will then put their finger inside your back passage and feel for anything unusual, such as lumps. What happens after, once it’s done you can get up and get dressed. You’ll be able to leave as soon as you’re ready. If your doctor or nurse finds anything unusual they will refer you for further tests, such as a colonoscopy or flexible sigmoidoscopy.  
Testing for blood in your poo using the FIT test: FIT (Faecal Immunochemical Test) is a test that looks for blood in a sample of your poo. It looks for tiny traces of blood that you might not be able to see and which could be a sign of cancer. Traces of blood in your poo can be caused by other medical conditions and doesn’t necessarily mean you have cancer. But if it is cancer, finding it at an early stage means treatment is more likely to work. This information is about using the FIT test for people who have symptoms that could be caused by bowel cancer. We have separate information about using FIT for the Bowel Cancer Screening Programme for people who don’t have symptoms of bowel cancer. What is FIT?: The Faecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) looks for tiny traces of blood in your poo that are too small to see. The test recognises human blood. This means it is less likely to pick up other blood in your poo that might have come from something you ate. Why do I need to do a FIT test? Your doctor might give you this test as part of the investigation for your symptoms. The FIT results help your doctor decide whether to refer you urgently for more tests. You might have to do this test if you have symptoms which could be caused by bowel cancer. Symptoms might include: a change in your normal bowel habit, such as looser poo, pooing more often or constipation,  a lower than normal level of red blood cells (anaemia),  unexplained weight loss Open a glossary item, tummy (abdominal) pain. How do I do a FIT test? You do this test yourself at home. You only need to collect one sample of poo. Your doctor will give you the test. Or they will arrange for you to get one in the post. The easiest way to collect the sample is to use an old plastic container, line it with toilet paper and put it in the toilet. And then have a poo into the container. Do not wee into the container. And do not let your poo touch the water or the toilet. Once you have collected your poo: dip the stick from the testing kit in the poo, make sure the end is covered with poo,  put the stick back in the tube and twist it shut, write the date on the side of the tube, put the tube into the sample bag. After the test: Your doctor will give you clear instructions about what to do with your sample of poo. You might return the sample to your GP or the hospital. Or they might give you an envelope and ask you to send it in the post. Getting your results. You should get your results within 1 or 2 weeks.  Waiting for results can make you anxious. Ask your doctor or nurse how long it will take to get them. Contact the doctor who arranged the test if you haven’t heard anything after a couple of weeks. There are different results you can get after the FIT. These include: Blood in your poo, You will need further tests if there is blood found in your poo. Your doctor might call this FIT positive. This doesn’t mean that you have cancer. Blood in your poo can be caused by cancer or by other medical conditions. You usually have a test to look at the inside of your large bowel. This is called a colonoscopy. No blood in your poo. This means that no blood was found in your poo. Your doctor might call this FIT negative. For most people this means that they don’t have cancer. But a normal FIT result doesn't completely rule out cancer. Some people can have cancer and a normal FIT result. It’s important to go back to your GP if your symptoms continue, change, or get worse even if you have normal test results. Some people will need to have further tests. 
Flexible sigmoidoscopy looks inside the lower part of your large bowel. It is also called a bowel scope or flexi sig. A specially trained doctor or endoscopist (a healthcare professional trained in endoscopy) uses a thin flexible tube called a colonoscope. This has a small light and camera at one end. They put the tube into your back passage and gently move it up into the lower part of your bowel. This allows them to see the pictures of the inside of your bowel on a TV monitor. You usually have this test in the endoscopy department in a hospital. It takes up to 15 minutes. But you should expect to be at the hospital for about 2 hours. A flexible sigmoidoscopy is different to a colonoscopy. It only looks inside your rectum and the lower part of your bowel, whereas a colonoscopy looks at your entire bowel. Why you might have it. You might have a flexible sigmoidoscopy to: help find the cause of your bowel symptoms, check a condition that you have been diagnosed with in the past. Before your test. You get sent written instructions before your test about what you need to do. Your bowel needs to be empty of poo for a flexible sigmoidoscopy. This is so the endoscopist has a clear view of your bowel. To prepare you for the test: you may have an enema - you might be sent this to do at home or you may have it when you get to the hospital instead of an enema, you might be sent a liquid bowel preparation (laxative) to drink and follow a special diet for a couple of days beforehand, you usually can't eat or drink for a few hours before your appointment time. If you're taking iron tablets or drugs that can cause constipation, you need to stop taking them about a week before your appointment. Your appointment letter gives you more details about this. Contact the hospital for advice before your appointment if you're diabetic or taking medicines to thin your blood. 
How you have a flexible sigmoidoscopy. When you arrive at the hospital you're seen by a nurse. They'll check your temperature, blood pressure, breathing and heart rate. You also see the endoscopist, they'll explain what will happen and ask you to sign a consent form. This is a good time to ask any questions you may have. Your nurse will give you a hospital gown to change into. You might also wear paper shorts with an opening at the back. During the test, you'll lie on a bed on your left side, with your knees tucked up to your chest. You don't normally need medication to make you relax while you have the test. The endoscopist will first check your back passage for any abnormalities. They then gently put the colonoscope into your back passage and up into the large bowel. This is uncomfortable but is not usually painful. They put gel on the colonoscope to make it more comfortable. The gel usually feels cold. The doctor or nurse puts a small amount of gas and water through the colonoscope into your bowel. This opens the bowel so they can see the lining of the bowel clearly. This can make you feel bloated and like you want to go to the toilet. Don't worry you won't as your bowel will be empty. You may pass wind during the procedure. Don’t feel embarrassed this is normal for this test. If you find it too uncomfortable at any stage tell the endoscopist and they will stop. You might have pain relief using gas and air (Entonox). This is a fast acting pain relief breathed in through a mouth piece. Having a flexible sigmoidoscopy: During the test, they take photographs of your bowel lining. If your doctor or nurse sees any abnormal areas they will take tissue samples (biopsies). If you have any growths in the bowel lining (polyps), they can remove them with a wire loop. They put the wire loop down the colonoscope. These growths go to the laboratory get checked by a pathologist. A pathologist is an expert who looks at and identifies cells. After the test: You might feel bloated and have mild cramping pain after the test. You can eat and drink as usual. You can usually go home after the test. Getting your results. Biopsy results are usually back within 2 weeks. You get your results from your specialist. If your GP referred you for tests, they also get a copy of your results. Waiting for biopsy results can be an anxious time. Ask your doctor how long you should expect to wait for your results. If you haven't heard anything a couple of weeks after your test, contact your doctor to chase up the results for you. For support and information, you can call the Cancer Research UK information nurses on freephone 0808 800 4040, from 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday. They can give advice about who can help you and what kind of support is available.
What are the possible risks? Flexible sigmoidoscopy is a very safe procedure but your nurse will tell you who to contact if you have any problems after your test. Your doctors will make sure the benefits of having a sigmoidoscopy outweigh any possible risks. Bleeding, After having a biopsy or polyp removed, you might have some bleeding. This is usually a small amount, and stops on its own within a couple of days. Tear in your bowel. Very rarely there is a small tear in the bowel wall (perforation). If this happens it’s likely you would need surgery to repair the tear. 
Colonoscopy for bowel cancer: A colonoscopy looks at the whole of the inside of your large bowel. An endoscopist (a specially trained healthcare professional) uses a flexible tube called a colonoscope. The tube has a small light and camera at one end. The endoscopist puts the tube into your back passage and passes it along the bowel. They can see pictures of the inside of your bowel on a TV monitor.  Why you might have a colonoscopy. You might have a colonoscopy to: help find the cause of your bowel symptoms, look for early signs of bowel cancer as part of the national screening programme, or if you are at high risk of bowel cancer, monitor you after treatment for bowel cancer. Before your test: Your bowels need to be empty for a colonoscopy. To do this you take medications (laxatives) to empty your bowel the day before your test. A laxative is a liquid bowel preparation. After taking the laxatives you might need the toilet often and very suddenly. You might have some cramps. It is sensible to stay at home for a few hours after taking laxatives so that you are near a toilet.  The hospital might ask you to eat a low fibre diet for 1 or 2 days before the test. It is very important to drink plenty of clear fluids. This includes: water, black tea or coffee, squash (without red or purple colouring), clear soup. You should get written instructions before your test about what you need to do. Contact the hospital for advice if you are diabetic or taking regular medication. You might need to stop some medicines before your test.
What happens in a colonoscopy? You usually have a colonoscopy as an outpatient in the endoscopy department at the hospital. Before the procedure you’ll see your endoscopist. They'll explain the procedure to you and ask you to sign a consent form. This is a good time to ask any questions you may have.  You wear a hospital gown and might also wear paper shorts with an opening at the back. You're offered painkillers and a medicine to relax you, these make you drowsy (sedation). You have these as injections into a small tube (cannula) in your vein. Some hospitals use gas and air (Entonox). This is a fast acting pain relief that you breathe in through a mouth piece. You lie on your left side with your knees drawn up towards your chest. The colonoscope goes into your back passage (rectum) and passes into your bowel. The tube bends easily so it can pass around the curves in your bowel. The endoscopist puts a small amount of gas is put into your bowel to help see all the bowel lining. The endoscopist may press on your stomach or change your position to help the tube pass through your bowel. During the test they take photographs of your bowel lining. And the endoscopist can remove tissue samples (biopsies). If they see any growths (polyps) they remove them with a wire loop put down the colonoscope. You might also have a dye sprayed onto the lining of the bowel to show up any abnormal areas. This is called chromoscopy. Colonoscopies can be uncomfortable but shouldn't be painful.
After your Colonoscopy: You go to a recovery area to rest if you have had sedation. Your nurse monitors you. They offer you a snack and drink when you are ready. You might be in the recovery area for a couple of hours. You might have bloating and cramping pains after the test. This is due to the gas that goes into your bowel. It normally gets back to normal after a few hours. As you’re having sedation you’ll need someone with you so they can take you home and stay with you overnight. Also for 24 hours after you shouldn’t drive, drink alcohol, operate heavy machinery or sign any legally binding documents.
Getting your results Colonoscopy: Before you go home, your doctor tells you if they removed any growths (polyps) or tissue samples (biopsies) from your bowel. The biopsy results can take up to 2 weeks. Your specialist writes to you with the results. If your GP referred you for the test, they should also receive a copy. Contact your doctor if you haven’t heard anything after a couple of weeks. Waiting for biopsy results can be an anxious time. It might be helpful to talk to someone close to you.
Possible risks of Colonoscopy: Colonoscopy is a very safe procedure. But your nurse will tell you who to contact if you have any problems afterwards. Your doctors make sure the benefits of having a colonoscopy outweigh any possible risks. Some of the possible risks include: Tummy (abdominal) pain, You may have some cramping or pain in your tummy after the test. This is due to the carbon dioxide or air they put into the bowel. This should go away after a few hours. You may also experience some pain or tenderness if you had some tissue removed during the colonoscopy, Bleeding, After having a biopsy or polyp removed, you might have some bleeding. This is usually a small amount and stops on its own within a couple of days. Tear in your bowel, Very rarely there is a small tear in the bowel wall (perforation). If this happens it’s likely you would need surgery to repair the tear, Difficulty breathing, There is a risk you might react to the sedation drug. It can cause temporary feeling of difficulty with breathing. But this is rare. It's easily treated by giving you oxygen through a small plastic tube into your nose. Your nurse monitors you closely.  
Colon capsule endoscopy: A colon capsule endoscopy looks at the inside of your large bowel (colon). You might have it if you have symptoms of bowel cancer. You swallow a capsule that contains a small disposable camera. The capsule is the size of a large vitamin pill. The camera takes thousands of pictures as it travels along your gut. The camera transmits the pictures wirelessly to a data recorder that you wear on your waist. The test is complete once the capsule has passed through your bowel and out into the toilet. A doctor or specialist nurse looks at the pictures from the data recorder to help find out the cause of your symptoms. This test isn’t available in all hospitals at the moment.
Why you might have a colon capsule endoscopy? You might have a colon capsule endoscopy if you have symptoms of bowel cancer. This includes having blood picked up in your poo on a Faecal Immunochemical Test (FIT). Usually if you have symptoms of bowel cancer you have a colonoscopy. For this test, your doctor puts a tube with a camera on the end into your back passage to look inside your large bowel (colon). In March 2021, NHS England announced that some people with symptoms of bowel cancer may have colon capsule endoscopy instead of having a colonoscopy straight away. The colon capsule endoscopy can help to rule out bowel cancer. And many people do not need to have further tests. The colon capsule endoscopy is a less invasive test than colonoscopy, which people may prefer. You still need to have a colonoscopy if your doctor sees any abnormal areas on the colon capsule endoscopy. This is so they can take samples of tissue (biopsies) or remove growths (polyps) if necessary. Colon capsule endoscopy is a new project that is taking place in a number of hospitals across England. They may offer you this test if it’s available in your area. Some hospitals in Scotland started to use colon capsule endoscopy towards the end of 2020. It will become available in more hospitals over the coming months.
Preparing for your colon capsule endoscopy: Before the test, you must stop eating for some time. Your appointment letter will have instructions on what to do and what you can eat and drink. You normally have a low fibre diet for about 5 days before your test. You also need to take some medicine to empty your bowels (laxatives). They call this bowel preparation or bowel prep. It’s important to follow the instructions carefully so that you have a clean bowel for the test. You take your usual medicines as normal in the days leading up to the test. Your nurse will ask you to stop taking the following medicines one week before the test: iron tablets, non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs (such as ibuprofen, diclofenac or celecoxib). Your nurse will tell you when to take your regular medication on the day of the test. Contact them about this if you have any questions.  Instructions vary slightly between hospitals but the following is generally what happens. The day before the test: Don't eat anything after lunch. Drink only clear fluids for the rest of the day - this includes black tea and black coffee. Start taking the bowel preparation as your appointment letter describes – it usually is a powder that you dissolve in water and drink over a set time, such as an hour or two. On the day of the test: Take the remaining bowel prep in the morning. Do not eat anything until your appointment. You can only drink water. You can’t have this test if you are pregnant. Phone the hospital before your appointment if you are pregnant or think you might be. Also contact the hospital if you have a pacemaker, an artificial heart valve, cochlear implant or an internal electromedical device.
What happens during the colon capsule endoscopy? At the hospital you go to the outpatient department or the endoscopy unit on the morning of the test. You are at the hospital for about an hour. The test itself can take up to 10 hours. In some hospitals, they may offer you to have the test at home. This means you won’t need to go into hospital at all. A courier will deliver the capsule, data recorder and laxatives to you, with all the instructions. They pick the recorder up the next day and return it to the hospital. The doctor or nurse will explain the procedure to you and ask you to sign a consent form. This is a good time to ask any questions you may have.  There are two ways you may have the test. The most common way is to wear a belt with built in sensors inside it. Photograph showing a capsule endoscopy Or the nurse or technician may put some sticky pads (sensors) on your chest and stomach area. They then attach a data recorder to a belt that you wear around your waist. Make sure you don't use any body lotion or sprays to these areas. Once this is in place, your nurse, doctor or technician will ask you to swallow a capsule which has the camera inside. You swallow it whole with some water. Your nurse tells you when you can drink again and when you can have a light snack. During the test you should avoid physical exercise that makes you sweaty, and also avoid bending or stooping. At home - Once you have swallowed the capsule and your nurse has given you all the instructions, you can leave the hospital. They will give you instructions about taking more laxatives for your bowel. This is to keep your bowel moving which helps the capsule pass through before the battery life ends. To help keep your bowel moving, it’s also important to stay active during the test. When you sit or lie down, your bowel movement slows down. You may go back to hospital later that afternoon to check if the capsule has passed into the large bowel.  The camera takes pictures as it passes through your bowel. It sends all the photos that it takes to the data recorder. You need to check the blue light is flashing on the data recorder. Your nurse will tell you when you can start to eat and drink normally again. This is usually about 8 hours after you swallowed the capsule. You can remove the sensors or belt once the test has finished. You return the data recorder to the department later that day or the next day. 
After your colon capsule endoscopy: A technician downloads the pictures from the data recorder to a computer. A doctor or specialist nurse then looks at the pictures. The capsule is disposable. You pass it naturally in your poo when you go to the toilet. You must not have an MRI scan until after you have passed the capsule out of your body.
Possible risks of colon capsule endoscopy: The team caring for you will give you phone numbers to contact if you have any questions or problems after your test. A capsule endoscopy is usually a very safe procedure. Your doctors make sure the benefits of having a capsule endoscopy outweigh any possible risks. Very rarely, the capsule might get stuck inside your body. Tell your doctor or nurse if you are worried that you have not passed out the capsule. You might need an x-ray to check if it is still in your bowel. If you develop tummy pain, vomiting or generally feel unwell, follow the advice your team gave you and contact them.
Getting your colon capsule endoscopy results: It may take some days or weeks for the medical team to look at all the pictures. They send the results to the doctor who arranged the test. Waiting for results can make you anxious. You might have contact details for a specialist nurse who you can speak to for information and support if you need to. It may help to talk to a close friend or relative about how you feel. For information and support you can contact the Cancer Research UK nurses on freephone 0808 800 4040. The lines are open from 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday.
CT colonography: CT (computed tomography) colonography is a test that uses CT scans to check the large bowel (colon) and back passage (rectum). It’s also called a virtual colonoscopy. You have this test as an outpatient in the CT scanning (or radiology) department at the hospital. A radiographer or specialist doctor (radiologist) carries out the test. It usually takes around 30 minutes but you should expect to be in the department for about an hour or so. Why do I need a CT colonography? You usually have this test to help find the cause of your symptoms.
Before your CT colonography test: You need to have an empty bowel for this test. This is so the radiographer can clearly see the inside of your bowel and rectum. You'll get clear written information on what to do before you have a scan. Your preparation usually starts a couple of days before the test. You need to take strong medication (laxatives) to empty your bowel the day before. Or you might need to drink a special liquid (contrast medium) called gastrografin over 1 or 2 days. Gastrografin is a type of dye containing iodine. It helps to make scan pictures clearer. It also acts as a laxative and may give you diarrhoea. Having gastrografin or laxatives will mean that you need to open your bowels often, and very suddenly. You might also have some cramping pains. It’s best to stay at home for a few hours after taking gastrografin or the laxatives, so that you are near a toilet. You might also need to follow a low fibre diet for 1 or 2 days before the test. To prevent dehydration it’s important to drink plenty of clear fluids such as: water, black tea or coffee, squash (without red or purple colouring), clear soup. You may need to stop taking iron tablets or other medicines which can cause constipation. You usually stop these one week before the test. Contact the radiology department as soon as possible before your appointment if you take medicines to thin your blood or you are diabetic. You'll get other instructions to follow. Contact the CT department if you are pregnant or diabetic.
What happens during CT colonography? When you arrive you usually fill out a checklist or questionnaire with the radiographer. They will explain the procedure and ask you to sign a consent form. They ask you questions about your medical history and any allergies. It's a good time to ask them any further questions that you may have.  They'll ask you to change into a hospital gown. You might have a medicine to relax your bowel muscles. This medicine is Buscopan. You have it as an injection through a fine tube (cannula) into your bloodstream. You lie on the couch on your side. The radiographer puts a small tube a few centimetres long into your rectum. They then pump carbon dioxide or air inside. This opens the bowel, helping to get clear scans of the inside of your bowel. You may feel uncomfortable and bloated. Rarely, people have pain.
Having a CT colonography: A CT colonography is a test to look at the inside of your bowel. Your bowel needs to be empty for the test so you have to follow a special diet for a couple of days beforehand. Usually a low fibre or liquid diet. You’ll be given instructions about what you need to do. Before the test you take a laxative or a special liquid called gastrografin. This is a dye to help make the scan clearer but also works as a laxative. You will have diarrhoea so it’s best to stay at home close to a toilet. On the day of the test you can continue to drink clear fluids up to a few hours before. The radiographer puts a small tube called a cannula into a vein in your arm or the back of your hand. You may have a drug through this cannula to relax your bowel muscles. This reduces cramping during your test. You may need to have an injection of x-ray dye through the cannula. This helps to show the other organs outside of the bowel. You then need to lie on your left side. The radiographer will put a small tube into your back passage to pump air or carbon dioxide inside your bowel. This helps to open up the bowel to make it easier to see it on the computer. You may feel as if you need to go the toilet or to pass wind. It is normal but try to keep in as much gas as you can. You then have 2 or 3 CT scans in different positions. All of your images will be looked at using a special computer programme. This shows up any growths or abnormal areas on your bowel wall. After the test you may feel bloated, have stomach pains and pass wind. This doesn’t last long. To make sure you’re ok you usually stay in the department for 20 minutes. Then you can go home and eat and drink normally again. You usually get the results within a couple of weeks from the person who sent you for the test.
During the CT colonography scan: The radiographer will then ask you to lie on your front and the scanning table moves into the CT scanner. The middle part of your body is in the centre of the ring. You will be alone in the room while you have the scan. But they can still see you and talk to you through an intercom.  Midway through your scan you might have an injection of contrast medium Open a glossary item. This helps show up the bowel more clearly on the scans. You have this through your cannula. You often have a second scan lying on your back. At certain times the radiographer may ask you to hold your breath for a few seconds. It is important that you lie as still as you can during the scan. A computer matches all the scans you've had to make a virtual scan of the inside of your bowel. 
After your CT colonography scan: After the scan the radiographer removes the tube from your back passage, and shows you to the toilet. You usually stay in the department for a short time after the test. This is to check you don't have an allergic reaction to the Buscopan or the contrast medium. The radiographer will remove the cannula from your vein when its time for you to go home. You can eat, drink and take your medicines as normal after the scan. Getting your results: It can take up to 1 to 2 weeks to get your results. You usually get your results from your specialist. It is important to check with your doctor how long you should expect to wait for your results.  Waiting for results can be an anxious time. It might be helpful to talk to someone close to you. If you have not had your results a few weeks after your test, you could contact your doctor to chase your results for you. You can also contact the Cancer Research UK nurses on a freephone number 0808 800 4040. The lines are open from 9 to 5, from Monday to Friday.
Possible risks of a CT colonography scan: CT colonography is a very safe procedure. Your radiographer will tell you who to contact if you have any problems after your test. Your doctor will make sure the benefits of having a CT colonography outweigh the possible risks. Some of the possible risks include: Loss of body fluid (dehydration), Clearing the bowel can cause dehydration in some people. It is very important to drink plenty of fluids before and after your scan. Effects of gastrografin: Gastrografin can make people feel or be sick. It may cause a mild rash but this is uncommon. Very rarely you can have an allergic reaction. If you feel ill or have problems breathing during the test, tell the radiographer straight away. Effects of contrast medium: The injection of contrast medium might make you hot and flushed for a few minutes. You might get a metallic taste in your mouth. It is common to feel warmth like you are passing urine, but you are not. This feeling goes away quickly. Very rarely, people have a reaction to the contrast medium. If you feel ill or have problems breathing during the test, tell the radiographer straight away. Tummy (abdominal) pain. You may have some bloating or pain in your abdomen after the test. This is due to the carbon dioxide or air put into the bowel. This should go away shortly afterwards. Tear in your bowel - There is a small risk of a tear (perforation) in your bowel. This is very rare. If it happened you would often need surgery to repair the tear. Blurred vision: The medicine used to relax your bowel wall might cause temporary blurred vision. You shouldn't drive for an hour or so or until your vision has returned to normal. Tell your radiographer if you have glaucoma or heart problems before you have medicine to relax your bowels. Radiation exposure: CT scanners use x-rays to make images which use a small amount of radiation. Exposure to radiation during a CT scan can slightly increase your risk of developing cancer in the future. Talk to your doctor if this worries you. You should not have CT colonography if there is a risk that you are pregnant. 
Blood tests for bowel cancer. Blood tests can: check your general health, including how well your liver and kidneys are working, check numbers of blood cells, help diagnose cancer and other conditions. Preparing for your blood tests: You can eat and drink normally before most blood tests. For fasting blood tests you need to stop eating and drinking beforehand. Your doctor will tell you for how long. What happens? You sit or lie down to have the test. A doctor, nurse or phlebotomist (person specialised in taking blood) chooses the best vein to use. This is usually from your arm or hand. Let them know if you are afraid of needles, get unwell with the sight of blood or are allergic to plasters or latex. They put a tight band (tourniquet) around your arm above the area where they take the sample. You may need to clench your fist to make it easier to find a vein. They clean your skin and then put a small needle into your vein. Next, they attach a small bottle or syringe to the needle to draw out some blood. They might fill several small bottles. Once they have all the samples, they release the band around your arm. They then take the needle out and put pressure on the area with a cotton wool ball or small piece of gauze for a few minutes. This helps to stop bleeding and bruising. Look away when they’re taking the blood if you prefer. Tell your doctor, nurse or phlebotomist if you feel unwell.
Possible risks of having a blood test: Blood sampling (phlebotomy) is a safe test. There is a possibility of: bleeding and bruising - pressing hard when the needle is removed can help to stop it, pain - this is normally mild and can last for a few minutes, swelling (oedema) - ask your nurse, doctor or phlebotomist to avoid an arm that is swollen or has a risk of swelling, feeling faint or fainting - tell the person doing your blood test if you're feeling lightheaded or dizzy at any time, infection - this is very rare. 
Getting your Blood test results: Ask your doctor about when you’ll get your results, and who will give them to you. Some results may be available quickly (for example, full blood count). Some tumour marker and genetic tests may can take several weeks.
Types of blood tests:  Full blood count (FBC), A full blood count (FBC) measures the number of red cells, white cells and platelets in your blood. Red cells carry oxygen around our bodies. Haemoglobin is the part of the cell that carries oxygen. If you have a low red cell count, your doctor might say you’re anaemic (pronounced a-nee-mic). This can make you feel tired, short of breath and dizzy. White cells fight infections. There are several different types of white cells, including neutrophils and lymphocytes. Platelets help clot the blood, for example after a cut. Symptoms of a low platelet count include abnormal bleeding, such as bleeding gums and nosebleeds. There is a range of normal for blood counts. The range of figures quoted as normal varies slightly between laboratories and also differs between men and women. Liver function tests (LFTs). Liver function tests (LFTs) check how well your liver is working. LFTs look for levels of enzymes and proteins made by the liver or which are cleared by the liver. They include: alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), gamma-glutamyl transferase (Gamma GT). They might be raised if you have a blockage in your liver or bile duct, or if you drink a lot of alcohol. LFTs also look at the amount of bilirubin in the blood. This is a chemical in bile Open a glossary item. Bilirubin can be raised if you have a problem with your liver or gallbladder. Bilirubin can cause yellowing of your skin and eyes (jaundice). LFTs also measure albumin. This is a protein in the blood that can be low when you have some types of cancer. You can also have low albumin if you’ve been eating small amounts and are malnourished. Urea and electrolytes: These blood tests show how well your kidneys are working. Urea is a waste chemical produced from digesting protein. Our kidneys remove urea from the blood and get rid of it in urine. Electrolytes are substances such as sodium, potassium, chloride and bicarbonate. Tumour markers: Tumour markers are substances that might be raised if there is a cancer. They’re usually proteins. They can be found in the blood, urine or body tissues. Some tumour markers are only produced by one type of cancer. Others can be made by several types. Some markers are found in non cancerous conditions as well as cancer. Doctors might use tumour markers to monitor how well your cancer treatment is working or check if the cancer has come back. If you have bowel cancer your doctor might test for a tumour marker called carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA).
Tests on your bowel cancer cells: After a doctor removes tissue or cancer from your bowel, they send a sample of cells to the laboratory. A doctor called a pathologist does various tests on the cells. These tests can diagnose cancer and look for gene changes. Some of these tests can show how well particular treatments might work, such as targeted cancer drugs and immunotherapy. Finding the type of cancer. A pathologist looks at the cancer cells under a microscope to see which type and grade of bowel cancer you have.
What are genes? Genes are coded messages that tell cells how to behave. They control how our bodies grow and develop. All cancers develop because something has gone wrong with one or more of the genes in a cell. A change in a gene is called a ‘fault’ or ‘mutation’. The tests: Doctors can do various tests. The results of each test can be useful in different ways. The tests can: show which targeted drug treatments might work for your bowel cancer, help doctors find new ways of treating bowel cancer, help you and the doctors understand more about the cause of your cancer, and help you
RAS genes: The doctor might test your bowel cancer to look for changes (mutations) in a group of genes called RAS genes. Mutated RAS genes can cause cancer cells to grow and spread. You might have: a normal RAS gene, which is also known as RAS wild type, an abnormal RAS gene, which is known as a mutated RAS gene, which Targeted cancer drugs such as cetuximab and panitumumab can work well for people with advanced bowel cancer who have a normal RAS gene (RAS wild type).
The doctor might look to see if your bowel cancer cells have changes (mutations) in the BRAF gene. This gene makes a protein called BRAF which is involved in cell growth. A change to this gene can cause it to make an overactive BRAF protein. This makes cells grow and divide too fast. You might have: BRAF positive bowel cancer, which means there are changes in the BRAF gene, BRAF negative bowel cancer, which means you don’t have these changes, Doctors know that people with BRAF positive bowel cancer don't respond as well to treatment. Researchers have been looking at different ways of treating this type of bowel cancer. 
Microsatellite instability: A small number of bowel cancers have DNA changes called microsatellite instability Open a glossary item or mismatch repair deficiency Open a glossary item. Your doctor might check your bowel cancer for this. Microsatellites are short, repeating arrangements (sequences) of DNA inside cells. Every time a cell divides, it makes new copies of these DNA sequences. Cells can correct any mistakes that happen in this process. But if these repair processes are faulty, mistakes can happen when the cell divides causing changes in the new copies of DNA. Changes in the length of the new DNA sequence are called microsatellite instability. These changes can cause cells to grow abnormally. Your doctor might describe your test results as: microsatellite stable (MSS) – this means they didn’t see any instability, microsatellite low (MSI low) – this means they saw a low level of instability, microsatellite instability high (MSI high) – this means they saw a high level of instability, mismatch repair deficient (MMRd), Your doctor can use the test results to help you decide whether to have further genetic tests. Further genetic tests can tell you whether there is an inherited cause for your bowel cancer. What happens? You might not need any extra tests. The doctor can sometimes do genetic tests on your bowel cancer cells that they removed during surgery or when you were first diagnosed. But sometimes the doctor needs to take another sample of your bowel cancer cells. They can take a sample from your bowel or from a secondary site if your cancer has spread. They will tell you more about this and about what the test will involve. 
MRI scan for bowel cancer: MRI stands for magnetic resonance imaging. It uses magnetism and radio waves to create cross sectional pictures of the body. It produces pictures from angles all around the body and shows up soft tissues very clearly.
You usually have an MRI scan in the x-ray (radiology) department as an outpatient. It can take up to an hour and a half. Why you might have an MRI scan? You might have an MRI scan to find out where in the bowel the cancer is, how big it is and whether it has spread to any other parts of your body.
Preparing for your MRI scan. Before you go to your appointment, or when you arrive, you fill in a safety checklist. This asks about: any operations you’ve had, whether you have any metal implants or other metals in your body, An MRI scan uses strong magnetism which could affect any metal in your body. This includes: pacemakers or an implantable defibrillator (to treat abnormal heart rhythms), surgical clips, pins or plates, cochlear implants (for deafness), metal fragments anywhere in your body – for example from an injury, dental fillings and bridges, You can still have an MRI scan if you have some metals in your body, but your doctor and radiographer decide if it’s safe for you. Tell the scanner staff about any metals in your body.
Some people feel claustrophobic or closed in when they’re having an MRI scan. Contact the department before your test if you’re likely to feel like this. The hospital staff can take extra care to make sure you’re comfortable and that you understand what’s going on. Your doctor can give you medicine to help you relax if you need to. An MRI is generally safe during pregnancy. But as a precaution, you usually won’t have one during the first 3 months of your pregnancy. Tell the department staff beforehand if you think you’re pregnant. 
What to expect when you have an MRI scan: When you arrive at the scanning department, the radiographer might ask you to change into a hospital gown. You might not have to undress if your clothing doesn’t have any metal, such as zips or clips.  You have to: remove any jewellery, including body piercings and your watch, remove your hair clips, empty your pockets of coins and keys. It’s safe to take a relative or friend into the scanning room with you. But check with the department staff first. Your friend or relative will also need to remove any metal they have on them. In the scanning room: Your radiographer takes you into the scanning room. The MRI machine is large and shaped like a doughnut. Photograph of an MRI scanner. You lie on your back on a couch that can slide into the MRI machine. You might have an injection of a dye (contrast medium) through a small plastic tube (cannula) into a vein in your arm. This helps to show up your body’s organs more clearly. Some people are allergic to the dye, so your radiographer will check first about any medical conditions or allergies you have. After the dye injection you may: feel sick, have a headache, feel warm or flushed, have a metallic taste in your mouth, feel a little dizzy. These effects are usually mild and last for a short time. Tell your radiographer if you feel unwell at any point during or after your scan.
Having the MRI scan: You need to lie as still as possible. The scan is painless but it can be uncomfortable to stay still. Tell the radiographer if you're getting stiff and need to move. The scan can take between 15 and 90 minutes. It depends on the area that they need to scan and how many images they need. Once you’re in the right position on the couch, your radiographer leaves the room. They can see you on a TV screen or through a window at all times from the control room. You can talk to each other during the scan, usually through an intercom. The couch moves through the MRI scanner. It takes pictures as you move through it. Your radiographer might ask you to hold your breath at times. The scanner makes a very loud clanging sound throughout the scan. You wear headphones to protect your hearing. You can also listen to music. Keeping your eyes closed can help.
This type of scan uses magnetism to build up a picture of the inside of your body to help your doctor either make a diagnosis and decide what treatment you need or to find out if your treatment is working. The radiographer makes sure you are lying in the correct position on the couch and explains what will happen. You need to lie as still as possible. MRI scans are very noisy so you wear ear plugs or headphones. During the scan you won’t feel anything. The space you lie in can feel small, if you think you will find it difficult being in a small space, contact the scanning department before your appointment. The radiographer controls the scan from a separate room but they will be able see and hear you throughout. Here you can see an example of an MRI scan. Once the scan is finished you can go home. If you have cancer of the back passage (rectum) your doctor may do this test with an endo anal coil. This is a small magnetic coil that goes inside your back passage during the scan. It is uncomfortable but gives a very clear picture of the back passage (rectum). You can ask your doctor how long the coil needs to stay there. 
After your MRI scan: When the scan is over, your radiographer comes back into the room and lowers the couch so that you can get up. You usually stay in the department for about 15 minutes after your scan if you've had the dye. This is in case it makes you feel unwell. Your radiographer removes the cannula from the vein in your arm before you leave. You should then be able to go home or back to work, and also eat and drink normally.
Getting your MRI results: You should get your results within 1 or 2 weeks. Waiting for results can make you anxious. Ask your doctor or nurse how long it will take to get them. Contact the doctor who arranged the test if you haven’t heard anything after a couple of weeks. You might have contact details for a specialist nurse and you can contact them for information if you need to. It may help to talk to a close friend or relative about how you feel. For more information about tests, contact the Cancer Research UK nurses on the freephone number 0808 800 4040. The lines are open from 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday.
Possible risks of MRI scans: An MRI is very safe and doesn’t use radiation. Some people can’t have an MRI but the checklist picks this up beforehand. Your doctor and radiographer make sure the benefits of having the test outweigh any possible risks. The risks include: Bruising and swelling, You might get a small bruise around the area where they put the needle in for the cannula. There's a risk that the contrast medium will leak outside the vein. This can cause swelling and pain in your arm but it’s rare. Tell your radiographer if you have any swelling or pain. Let your GP know if it doesn’t get better or starts to get worse when you’re at home. Allergic reaction: An allergic reaction to the contrast medium injection is rare. This most often starts with feeling weak, sweating and difficulty breathing. Tell your radiographer straight away if you feel unwell so they can give you medicine to control the reaction.
Ultrasound scan of the back passage (rectum). You might have this scan if you have cancer in your back passage (rectal cancer). It uses sound waves to look at the inside of your back passage (rectum). It can show how big the cancer is, and where it is in the rectum. It is also called a Trans Rectal Ultrasound (TRUS) or an Endorectal ultrasound (ERUS). What is an ultrasound scan? Ultrasound scans use high frequency sound waves to create a picture of a part of the body. They can show up changes, including abnormal growths. You might have one to diagnose a cancer or find out if it has spread. The ultrasound scanner has a microphone that gives off sound waves. The sound waves bounce off the organs inside your body and a microphone picks them up. The microphone links to a computer that turns the sound waves into a picture. You usually have them in the hospital x-ray department. A healthcare professional trained in ultrasound (sonographer) usually carries out the ultrasound in the hospital x-ray department.
Why you might have an ultrasound of your back passage? You might have an ultrasound scan to find out where the cancer is in your rectum. It can also show the doctor how large your cancer is, how far it has grown through the rectal wall, and whether it has spread further. This helps your doctor decide about your treatment.
Preparing for your ultrasound: You need to make sure you  open your bowels beforehand, so your rectum is empty when you go for your appointment. You might have a small enema, to help with this. An enema is a pouch filled with a small amount of liquid. You put the liquid into your back passage through a nozzle and it helps you empty your bowels. What happens? The sonographer will ask you to remove your lower clothes and underwear. They will give you a gown to wear and possibly paper shorts, with an opening at the back. You lie on the couch, on your left side. The doctor gently pushes an ultrasound probe inside your back passage (rectum). The probe is about the same size as a finger. They use a cold lubricating gel to make this more comfortable. They will look at the pictures of the inside of you back passage on a computer screen. The scan should only take a few minutes. 
What happens after your ultrasound? You can eat and drink normally after the test. You can go straight home or back to work afterwards. Getting your results - You usually get your results within a few weeks of your test. Your specialist will give them to you. Your GP may also receive a copy of the results. Waiting for results can be an anxious time. It might be useful to talk to someone close to you. If you want to talk to someone, you can contact our team of specialist cancer information nurses. Call free on 0808 800 4040, 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday.
Possible risks of ultrasound? Ultrasound of the back passage (rectum) is a very safe procedure but your nurse will tell you who to contact if you have any problems after your test. Your doctors will make sure the benefits of having an ultrasound outweigh any possible risks.
Bowel cancer screening. Bowel screening aims to find cancer early or to find changes in your bowel that could lead to cancer. The screening programmes send a bowel cancer testing kit every 2 years to people who can take part. You need to be registered with a GP to receive your screening invitations. The test is called FIT - Faecal Immunochemical Test. It looks for tiny traces of blood. You do the test at home. The kit contains instructions of what to do including a prepaid envelope to send the sample to the hospital. You should get the results within a few weeks. The letter will tell you what you need to do next. There are benefits and risks.
Bowel cancer screening is still going ahead in the UK. But because of COVID-19, there are delays. You might have to wait longer for your home-testing kit or a follow-up appointment. There might also be changes to what happens if you need a follow-up appointment. This includes the staff following strict guidance on infection control to protect you and themselves. This means that you won’t be able to take someone with you to your appointment. Your results might be delayed, so ask at your appointment how long it might take and who to contact if you haven’t heard in that time. It’s important to remember that screening is for healthy people with no symptoms. If you notice any unusual changes to your body that don’t go away, talk to your doctor. In most cases it won’t be cancer, but it’s best to get it checked out. What is screening? For screening to be useful the tests need to: be reliable at picking up cancers or abnormalities that could lead to cancer, do more good than harm to people taking part, be something that people are willing to do, Screening tests are not perfect and have some risks. The screening programme should also be good value for money for the NHS.
Who can have bowel screening? The screening programmes send a bowel cancer testing kit every 2 years to people eligible to take part. You need to be registered with a GP to receive your screening invitations. There are separate bowel screening programmes for the different countries in the UK. In England, you receive a bowel cancer screening kit if you're aged between 60 and 74 years. Some people may now receive a test before they turn 60. This is because NHS England is gradually expanding this programme to also invite people aged between 50 and 59. People aged over 74, can request a screening kit every 2 years by contacting the bowel cancer screening programme on 0800 707 6060.  
The bowel cancer screening test is called the faecal immunochemical test (FIT). The FIT looks for tiny traces of blood in the sample of poo which can be a sign of bowel cancer. How to do the FIT? You don’t need to respond to your screening invitation to take part. You will automatically be sent a testing kit (about 2 weeks later). You do the test in your own home. The test is clean and simple. You only need to collect one sample of poo. In the envelope you receive, there is: a detailed leaflet with instructions on how to do the test, a tube with a stick in it to collect your sample, prepaid specially designed (hygienic) envelope for you to send it back, The easiest way to collect the sample is to use an old plastic container, line it with toilet paper and pop it in the toilet. And then have a poo. Once you have collected your poo: dip the stick from the testing kit in the poo, make sure the end is covered with poo, put the stick back in the tube and twist it shut, write the date on the side of the tube, you may need to put a sticker from the letter on the side of the tube marked with + (this is only for people in Scotland), put the tube into the prepaid envelope and post it.
Screening for people at high risk of bowel cancer - People with some conditions have a higher risk of getting bowel cancer at a younger age than usual. They might have screening earlier than the normal NHS bowel cancer screening programme.  Around 5 out of 100 (5%) bowel cancers are due to conditions passed on through families (inherited). Screening aims to detect cancer at an early stage, when treatment is more likely to work. It can also help to prevent bowel cancer from developing in the first place. 
Screening test for people at high risk. People at high risk of bowel cancer have screening with colonoscopy. This test looks at the inside of the whole of the large bowel (colon). A specially trained healthcare professional (endoscopist) uses a flexible thin tube with a camera on the end to look at the bowel. 
A number of conditions can increase your risk of bowel cancer. An inherited bowel condition called familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). This is a rare condition that runs in families. It causes a lot of abnormal growths called polyps in the bowel. There is a high risk that one of these polyps will become cancerous. You have colonoscopies every year, if you have FAP. Specialists often advise people with FAP to have surgery to remove their large bowel (colon). This is because there is such a high risk of getting bowel cancer. 
An inherited bowel condition called Lynch syndrome: Lynch syndrome is sometimes called HNPCC- hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. It is an inherited gene change (mutation) that increases your bowel cancer risk. You start screening when you are 25 if you have HNPCC. Or 5 years before the age of diagnosis of your youngest affected relative. You continue for every 12-24 months until you’re 75.  
Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS): Serrated polyposis syndrome (sometimes called hyperplastic polyposis syndrome) is when polyps occur in the bowel with jagged edges (serrated). Research is looking into whether this is an inherited condition. If you have SPS you will be offered a colonoscopy every 1 to 3 years
A strong family history of bowel cancer: This means you have several relatives on the same side of your family diagnosed with bowel cancer. Or you have a close relative diagnosed at a particularly young age. If you have a strong family history of bowel cancer, but no gene for FAP or Lynch syndrome, you might have a colonoscopy between the ages of 35 to 45. If you don't have any polyps, you won't need another colonoscopy until you are 55. Talk to your GP if you think you have a strong family history of bowel cancer. They can refer you to your local genetics clinic. You'll see someone who specialises in looking at family histories and working out the likely risk of a particular disease. They can refer you to a bowel specialist for regular screening if necessary. 
Ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease: Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease cause inflammation and sores (ulceration) inside the bowel. These diseases increase your risk of bowel cancer. Your level of risk depends on: how long you have had the disease, which part of your bowel is affected, how bad your colitis or Crohn's is, whether you have a family history of bowel cancer. You usually have a colonoscopy 8 to 10 years after the symptoms start. You might have colonoscopies every 1 to 5 years depending on your level of risk.
Polyps in the bowel: Your doctor may suggest that you have regular tests to check the inside of your bowel, if you had polyps removed from the bowel in the past. This is to find any more polyps before they develop into cancer. How often you have these tests depends on: how many polyps you've had, how big the polyps were, how abnormal the cells in the polyps were, You might have tests every 1 to 5 years depending on your level of risk. 
Previous history of bowel cancer: There is a risk that you could get another new bowel cancer If you have had bowel cancer in the past. You may have a colonoscopy every few years. If you are not in a high risk group. There's no NHS screening available outside the age range covered by the UK bowel cancer screening programmes if you don't have a higher than average risk of bowel cancer.
Stages, types and grades. The stage of a bowel cancer tells you how far it has grown through the bowel wall and whether it has spread to nearby lymph glands or other organs. It helps your doctor to know which treatment you need. There are different ways of staging bowel cancer. There is a number staging system and the TNM system. The Dukes' staging system is not really used anymore. The type refers to the type of cell the cancer started in and where it began. The grade means how abnormal the cells look under the microscope.
Grades and types of bowel cancer: Bowel cancer can start in the large bowel (colon) or the back passage (rectum). It is also known as colorectal cancer. Bowel cancer is divided into different types depending on where it starts in the bowel, and the type of cell that it starts in. Knowing this helps your doctor decide which treatment you need. Grades: The grade of a cancer tells you how much the cancer cells look like normal cells. This gives your doctor an idea of how your cancer might behave and what treatment you need. The grades of bowel cancer cells are from 1 to 4: Low grade – slow growing: grade 1-  well differentiated, the cells look most like normal cells, grade 2 – moderately differentiated – the cells look a bit like normal cells. High grade – fast growing: grade 3 – poorly differentiated, the cells look very abnormal, grade 4 – undifferentiated, the cells look completely different from normal cells
TNM Staging: Tumour, node and metastasis (TNM) staging is one of the systems used to stage bowel (colon and rectal) cancer. The stage of a cancer tells you how big it is and how far it has spread. It helps your doctor decide which treatment you need. Doctors may also use the number staging system. The Duke's staging system is rarely used anymore. 
Number stages of bowel cancer: There are different ways to stage bowel cancer. The number staging system gives a number from stage 0 to stage 4. Stage 0 or CIS means that you have an early stage of bowel cancer. There are cancer cells in your bowel lining, but they’re completely contained. There is little risk of any cancer cells having spread.  Read about stage 1 to stage 4 bowel cancer below. Stage 1 bowel cancer has grown through the inner lining of the bowel, or into the muscle wall. It has not spread to lymph nodes or distant body parts. Stage 2 bowel cancer has spread into the outer wall of the bowel or into tissue or organs next to the bowel. It has not spread to the lymph nodes or distant parts of the body. Stage 3 bowel cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes, but hasn't spread to distant body parts. Stage 4 bowel cancer has spread to distant body parts, such as the liver or lungs. It's also called advanced bowel cancer.

Treatment: Bowel cancer can start in the large bowel (colon cancer) or back passage (rectal cancer). It is also called colorectal cancer. Your treatment depends on whether you have colon or rectal cancer. Your treatment also depends on the stage of your cancer.  When colon and rectal cancer spread to another part of the body it is called advanced bowel cancer. 
Preparing for treatment and life afterwards (prehabilitation): When you’re first diagnosed with cancer, you might feel worried and overwhelmed. But there are things you can do to help you feel more in control of your physical and mental health during this time. Research says that focusing on certain lifestyle changes in whatever time you have before treatment starts can help you cope better with its side effects and improve your long term health. In the hospital, preparing for treatment is also called prehabilitation or prehab. Prehabilitation (prehab) means getting ready for cancer treatment in whatever time you have before it starts. You can help yourself to get ready for cancer treatment by trying to eat a wide range of foods in the right proportions, also called a varied diet. You can help yourself to get ready for cancer treatment by being physically active. You can help yourself to get ready for cancer treatment by looking after your mental wellbeing. The recovery package is a set of interventions that your medical team uses to help improve your experience of living with cancer.
Treatment for bowel (colon) cancer. Bowel cancer can start in the large bowel (colon cancer) or back passage (rectal cancer). It is also called colorectal cancer. A team of doctors and other professionals discuss the best treatment and care for you. The main treatments are surgery and chemotherapy. Most people have surgery for colon cancer that hasn't spread. The operation you have depends on the position of the cancer in the bowel. Chemotherapy uses anti cancer drugs to destroy cancer. You might have it after surgery for colon cancer.  All treatments must be fully researched before they can be adopted as standard treatment for everyone. Find out about research into bowel (colorectal) cancer, as well as how to take part in clinical trials.Treatment for advanced bowel cancer can help to reduce symptoms, make you feel better and sometimes help you live longer. Treatment for advanced bowel cancer can help to reduce symptoms, make you feel better and sometimes help you live longer. After treatment, you have regular check ups and tests at the hospital. The doctors check how you are and see whether you have any problems or worries.
Treatment for bowel (rectal) cancer. Bowel cancer can start in the large bowel (colon cancer) or back passage (rectal cancer). It is also called colorectal cancer. This section is about treatment for rectal cancer that hasn't spread to another part of the body. A team of doctors and other professionals discuss the best treatment and care for you. The main treatments are surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and chemoradiotherapy. The type of surgery you have for cancer of the back passage (rectum) depends on the position and stage of your cancer.  You might have chemotherapy on its own or with radiotherapy. Fluorouracil, capecitabine, oxaliplatin and irinotecan are drugs used for rectal cancer. Treatment with chemotherapy and radiotherapy together is called chemoradiotherapy. You might have this treatment for cancer of the back passage (rectal cancer). Radiotherapy uses high energy waves similar to x-rays to kill bowel cancer cells. It is a treatment for cancer of the back passage (rectal cancer). Treatment for advanced bowel cancer can help to reduce symptoms, make you feel better and sometimes help you live longer. 
Treatment for advanced bowel cancer. Advanced bowel cancer is cancer that started in either the back passage (rectum) or large bowel (colon) and has spread to another part of the body. Deciding about treatment can be difficult when you have advanced bowel cancer. Treatment can help to reduce symptoms, make you feel better and sometimes can help you to live longer. Deciding about treatment can be difficult when you have advanced cancer. Treatments such as chemotherapy, targeted and immunotherapy drugs and radiotherapy can help to reduce symptoms. Symptoms of advanced bowel cancer can include sickness, pain, loss of appetite and bowel problems. There are treatments that can help. You might have surgery if advanced bowel cancer blocks your bowel and causes symptoms of bowel obstruction.  Sometimes you can have surgery to remove cancer that has spread to your liver or lungs. Chemotherapy uses anti cancer (cytotoxic) drugs to destroy cancer cells. You might have chemotherapy for advanced bowel cancer.Radiotherapy uses high energy rays similar to x-rays to kill cancer cells. It can shrink the cancer, relieve symptoms and help you feel more comfortable. You might have targeted or immunotherapy drugs as part of your treatment for advanced bowel cancer. Other treatments for bowel cancer that has spread to the liver include specialised ways of giving chemotherapy and radiotherapy directly into the cancer.
Survival - Bowel cancer is cancer that starts in the large bowel (colon cancer) or back passage (rectal cancer). It is also known as colorectal cancer. Survival depends on many factors. No one can tell you exactly how long you will live. Below are general statistics based on large groups of people. Remember, they can’t tell you what will happen in your individual case.  Your doctor can give you more information about your own outlook (prognosis). You can also talk about this with the Cancer Research UK nurses on freephone 0808 800 4040, from 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday. Survival by stage: There are no UK-wide statistics available for bowel cancer survival by stage. Survival statistics are available for each stage of bowel cancer in England. These figures are for men and women diagnosed between 2013 and 2017. Stage 1 - Around 90 out of 100 people (around 90%) with stage 1 bowel cancer (also called Dukes' A) will survive their cancer for 5 years or more after they're diagnosed. Stage 2 - More than 80 out of 100 people (more than 80%) with stage 2 bowel cancer (also called Dukes' B) will survive their cancer for 5 years or more after they're diagnosed. Stage 3 - Almost 70 out of 100 people (almost 70%) with stage 3 bowel cancer (also called Dukes' C) will survive their cancer for 5 years or more after they're diagnosed. Stage 4 -  10 out of 100 people (10%) with stage 4 bowel cancer (also called Dukes' D) will survive their cancer for 5 years or more after they're diagnosed. If the cancer has spread into the liver and the surgeon can remove it, more than 40 out of 100 people (more than 40%) will survive their cancer for 5 years or more after their operation.
Research and clinical trials: Research is looking at the causes, diagnosis and treatment of bowel cancer. It aims to prevent bowel cancer and improve tests, treatment, and ways of coping with symptoms and side effects. Find out about the latest UK research, clinical trials and how you can take part. Researchers are looking at new ways of improving surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy and targeted cancer treatments for bowel cancer. Trials aim to find out if a new test or treatment is safe or works better than current ones. Our clinical trials database has open, closed and result summaries of trials in the UK. Find out about what researchers should tell you before you agree to take part in a trial. Find out how our researchers are discovering new ways to tackle bowel cancer. 
Living with bowel cancer
Bowel cancer can start in the large bowel (colon cancer) or back passage (rectal cancer). It is also called colorectal cancer. There is support available to help you cope during and after bowel cancer treatment. Coping with cancer can be difficult. You might need emotional, practical and financial support. There is support available from your hospital team. You might have a colostomy or ileostomy after surgery for bowel cancer. The end of your bowel is brought out into an opening on your tummy. The opening is called a stoma or ostomy. Most people are able to resume their sex life after having bowel cancer. You will need time to get over surgery, or any other treatment. Most people are able to resume their sex life after having bowel cancer. You will need time to get over surgery, or any other treatment. You might need to look at what you eat and make changes to your diet after treatment for bowel cancer. You may need to experiment a bit to find out which foods upset your system. A dietitian can support you with diet problems from diagnosis, through treatment and afterwards. Treatment for bowel cancer (colon and rectum) can cause changes to your bowel. These effects can last for a few weeks or months after treatment. Sometimes they might go on for longer. There are many organisations, support groups, books, videos and other resources to help you cope with bowel cancer and the treatment. You can also find out about suppliers of stoma appliances.
Advanced bowel cancer - Advanced bowel (colorectal) cancer is cancer that started in either the back passage (rectum) or large bowel (colon) and has spread to another part of the body. The treatment depends on a number of factors including where the cancer is in your body. Treatment can include chemotherapy, surgery, targeted cancer drugs, immunotherapy and radiotherapy. cancer?
Advanced bowel cancer is cancer that has spread from the back passage (rectum) and large intestines (colon) to other parts of the body, such as the liver. The symptoms of advanced bowel cancer can include tiredness, loss of appetite and low energy. Treatment for advanced bowel cancer can help to reduce symptoms, make you feel better and sometimes help you live longer. Get support to cope with emotional, practical and physical issues when you have advanced bowel cancer.
Colorectal cancer (CRC), also known as bowel cancer, colon cancer, or rectal cancer, is the development of cancer from the colon or rectum (parts of the large intestine). Signs and symptoms may include blood in the stool, a change in bowel movements, weight loss, and fatigue.
Most colorectal cancers are due to old age and lifestyle factors, with only a small number of cases due to underlying genetic disorders. Risk factors include diet, obesity, smoking, and lack of physical activity. Dietary factors that increase the risk include red meat, processed meat, and alcohol. Another risk factor is inflammatory bowel disease, which includes Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Some of the inherited genetic disorders that can cause colorectal cancer include familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer; however, these represent less than 5% of cases. It typically starts as a benign tumor, often in the form of a polyp, which over time becomes cancerous.
Colorectal cancer may be diagnosed by obtaining a sample of the colon during a sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy. This is then followed by medical imaging to determine whether the disease has spread. Screening is effective for preventing and decreasing deaths from colorectal cancer. Screening, by one of a number of methods, is recommended starting from the age of 50 to 75. During colonoscopy, small polyps may be removed if found. If a large polyp or tumor is found, a biopsy may be performed to check if it is cancerous. Aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs decrease the risk of pain during polyp excision. Their general use is not recommended for this purpose, however, due to side effects.
Treatments used for colorectal cancer may include some combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Cancers that are confined within the wall of the colon may be curable with surgery, while cancer that has spread widely is usually not curable, with management being directed towards improving quality of life and symptoms. The five-year survival rate in the United States was around 65% in 2014. The individual likelihood of survival depends on how advanced the cancer is, whether or not all the cancer can be removed with surgery, and the person's overall health. Globally, colorectal cancer is the third most common type of cancer, making up about 10% of all cases. In 2018, there were 1.09 million new cases and 551,000 deaths from the disease. It is more common in developed countries, where more than 65% of cases are found. It is less common in women than men.
Signs and symptoms - The signs and symptoms of colorectal cancer depend on the location of the tumor in the bowel, and whether it has spread elsewhere in the body (metastasis). The classic warning signs include: worsening constipation, blood in the stool, decrease in stool caliber (thickness), loss of appetite, loss of weight, and nausea or vomiting in someone over 50 years old. Around 50% of individuals with colorectal cancer do not report any symptoms.
Rectal bleeding or anemia are high-risk symptoms in people over the age of 50. Weight loss and changes in a person's bowel habit are typically only concerning if they are associated with rectal bleeding.
Cause - 75–95% of colorectal cancer cases occur in people with little or no genetic risk. Risk factors include older age, male sex, high intake of fat, sugar, alcohol, red meat, processed meats, obesity, smoking, and a lack of physical exercise. Approximately 10% of cases are linked to insufficient activity. The risk from alcohol appears to increase at greater than one drink per day. Drinking 5 glasses of water a day is linked to a decrease in the risk of colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps. Streptococcus gallolyticus is associated with colorectal cancer. Some strains of Streptococcus bovis/Streptococcus equinus complex are consumed by millions of people daily and thus may be safe. 25 to 80% of people with Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus bacteremia have concomitant colorectal tumors. Seroprevalence of Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus is considered as a candidate practical marker for the early prediction of an underlying bowel lesion at high risk population. It has been suggested that the presence of antibodies to Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus antigens or the antigens themselves in the bloodstream may act as markers for the carcinogenesis in the colon.
Pathogenic Escherichia coli may increase the risk of colorectal cancer by producing the genotoxic metabolite, colibactin.
Inflammatory bowel disease
People with inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease) are at increased risk of colon cancer. The risk increases the longer a person has the disease, and the worse the severity of inflammation. In these high risk groups, both prevention with aspirin and regular colonoscopies are recommended. Endoscopic surveillance in this high-risk population may reduce the development of colorectal cancer through early diagnosis and may also reduce the chances of dying from colon cancer. People with inflammatory bowel disease account for less than 2% of colon cancer cases yearly. In those with Crohn's disease, 2% get colorectal cancer after 10 years, 8% after 20 years, and 18% after 30 years.In people who have ulcerative colitis, approximately 16% develop either a cancer precursor or cancer of the colon over 30 years.
Genetics - Those with a family history in two or more first-degree relatives (such as a parent or sibling) have a two to threefold greater risk of disease, and this group accounts for about 20% of all cases. A number of genetic syndromes are also associated with higher rates of colorectal cancer. The most common of these is hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, or Lynch syndrome) which is present in about 3% of people with colorectal cancer. Other syndromes that are strongly associated with colorectal cancer include Gardner syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). For people with these syndromes, cancer almost always occurs and makes up 1% of the cancer cases. A total proctocolectomy may be recommended for people with FAP as a preventive measure due to the high risk of malignancy. Colectomy, removal of the colon, may not suffice as a preventive measure because of the high risk of rectal cancer if the rectum remains. The most common polyposis syndrome affecting the colon is serrated polyposis syndrome, which is associated with a 25-40% risk of CRC.
Mutations in the pair of genes (POLE and POLD1) have been associated with familial colon cancer. Most deaths due to colon cancer are associated with metastatic disease. A gene that appears to contribute to the potential for metastatic disease, metastasis associated in colon cancer 1 (MACC1), has been isolated. It is a transcriptional factor that influences the expression of hepatocyte growth factor. This gene is associated with the proliferation, invasion, and scattering of colon cancer cells in cell culture, and tumor growth and metastasis in mice. MACC1 may be a potential target for cancer intervention, but this possibility needs to be confirmed with clinical studies.
Epigenetic factors, such as abnormal DNA methylation of tumor suppressor promoters, play a role in the development of colorectal cancer.
Pathogenesis: Colorectal cancer is a disease originating from the epithelial cells lining the colon or rectum of the gastrointestinal tract, most frequently as a result of mutations in the Wnt signaling pathway that increase signaling activity. The mutations can be inherited or acquired, and most probably occur in the intestinal crypt stem cell. The most commonly mutated gene in all colorectal cancer is the APC gene, which produces the APC protein. The APC protein prevents the accumulation of β-catenin protein. Without APC, β-catenin accumulates to high levels and translocates (moves) into the nucleus, binds to DNA, and activates the transcription of proto-oncogenes. These genes are normally important for stem cell renewal and differentiation, but when inappropriately expressed at high levels, they can cause cancer. While APC is mutated in most colon cancers, some cancers have increased β-catenin because of mutations in β-catenin (CTNNB1) that block its own breakdown, or have mutations in other genes with function similar to APC such as AXIN1, AXIN2, TCF7L2, or NKD1.
Beyond the defects in the Wnt signaling pathway, other mutations must occur for the cell to become cancerous. The p53 protein, produced by the TP53 gene, normally monitors cell division and induces their programmed death if they have Wnt pathway defects. Eventually, a cell line acquires a mutation in the TP53 gene and transforms the tissue from a benign epithelial tumor into an invasive epithelial cell cancer. Sometimes the gene encoding p53 is not mutated, but another protective protein named BAX is mutated instead.
Other proteins responsible for programmed cell death that are commonly deactivated in colorectal cancers are TGF-β and DCC (Deleted in Colorectal Cancer). TGF-β has a deactivating mutation in at least half of colorectal cancers. Sometimes TGF-β is not deactivated, but a downstream protein named SMAD is deactivated. DCC commonly has a deleted segment of a chromosome in colorectal cancer. Approximately 70% of all human genes are expressed in colorectal cancer, with just over 1% of having increased expression in colorectal cancer compared to other forms of cancer. Some genes are oncogenes: they are overexpressed in colorectal cancer. For example, genes encoding the proteins KRAS, RAF, and PI3K, which normally stimulate the cell to divide in response to growth factors, can acquire mutations that result in over-activation of cell proliferation. The chronological order of mutations is sometimes important. If a previous APC mutation occurred, a primary KRAS mutation often progresses to cancer rather than a self-limiting hyperplastic or borderline lesion. PTEN, a tumor suppressor, normally inhibits PI3K, but can sometimes become mutated and deactivated.
Comprehensive, genome-scale analysis has revealed that colorectal carcinomas can be categorized into hypermutated and non-hypermutated tumor types. In addition to the oncogenic and inactivating mutations described for the genes above, non-hypermutated samples also contain mutated CTNNB1, FAM123B, SOX9, ATM, and ARID1A. Progressing through a distinct set of genetic events, hypermutated tumors display mutated forms of ACVR2A, TGFBR2, MSH3, MSH6, SLC9A9, TCF7L2, and BRAF. The common theme among these genes, across both tumor types, is their involvement in Wnt and TGF-β signaling pathways, which results in increased activity of MYC, a central player in colorectal cancer.
Mismatch repair (MMR) deficient tumours are characterized by a relatively high amount of poly-nucleotide tandem repeats. This is caused by a deficiency in MMR proteins – which are typically caused by epigenetic silencing and or inherited mutations (e.g., Lynch syndrome). 15 to 18 percent of colorectal cancer tumours have MMR deficiencies, with 3 percent developing due to Lynch syndrome. The role of the mismatch repair system is to protect the integrity of the genetic material within cells (i.e., error detecting and correcting).Consequently, a deficiency in MMR proteins may lead to an inability to detect and repair genetic damage, allowing for further cancer-causing mutations to occur and colorectal cancer to progress.
The polyp to cancer progression sequence is the classical model of colorectal cancer pathogenesis. The polyp to cancer sequence describes the phases of transition from benign tumours into colorectal cancer over many years. Central to the polyp to CRC sequence are gene mutations, epigenetic alterations, and local inflammatory changes. The polyp to CRC sequence can be used as an underlying framework to illustrate how specific molecular changes lead to various cancer subtypes.
The term "field cancerization" was first used in 1953 to describe an area or "field" of epithelium that has been preconditioned (by what were largely unknown processes at the time) to predispose it towards development of cancer. Since then, the terms "field cancerization", "field carcinogenesis", "field defect", and "field effect" have been used to describe pre-malignant or pre-neoplastic tissue in which new cancers are likely to arise.
Field defects are important in progression to colon cancer. However, as pointed out by Rubin, "The vast majority of studies in cancer research has been done on well-defined tumors in vivo, or on discrete neoplastic foci in vitro. Yet there is evidence that more than 80% of the somatic mutations found in mutator phenotype human colorectal tumors occur before the onset of terminal clonal expansion." Similarly, Vogelstein et al. pointed out that more than half of somatic mutations identified in tumors occurred in a pre-neoplastic phase (in a field defect), during growth of apparently normal cells. Likewise, epigenetic alterations present in tumors may have occurred in pre-neoplastic field defects.
An expanded view of field effect has been termed "etiologic field effect", which encompasses not only molecular and pathologic changes in pre-neoplastic cells but also influences of exogenous environmental factors and molecular changes in the local microenvironment on neoplastic evolution from tumor initiation to death.
Epigenetics. Epigenetic alterations are much more frequent in colon cancer than genetic (mutational) alterations. As described by Vogelstein et al., an average cancer of the colon has only 1 or 2 oncogene mutations and 1 to 5 tumor suppressor mutations (together designated "driver mutations"), with about 60 further "passenger" mutations. The oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are well studied and are described above under Pathogenesis.
In addition to epigenetic alteration of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of protein-encoding genes and alterations in histones and chromosomal architecture that influence gene expression. As an example, 147 hypermethylations and 27 hypomethylations of protein coding genes were frequently associated with colorectal cancers. Of the hypermethylated genes, 10 were hypermethylated in 100% of colon cancers, and many others were hypermethylated in more than 50% of colon cancers. In addition, 11 hypermethylations and 96 hypomethylations of miRNAs were also associated with colorectal cancers. Abnormal (aberrant) methylation occurs as a normal consequence of normal aging and the risk of colorectal cancer increases as a person gets older. The source and trigger of this age-related methylation is unknown. Approximately half of the genes that show age-related methylation changes are the same genes that have been identified to be involved in the development of colorectal cancer. These findings may suggest a reason for age being associated with the increased risk of developing colorectal cancer.
Epigenetic reductions of DNA repair enzyme expression may likely lead to the genomic and epigenomic instability characteristic of cancer. As summarized in the articles Carcinogenesis and Neoplasm, for sporadic cancers in general, a deficiency in DNA repair is occasionally due to a mutation in a DNA repair gene, but is much more frequently due to epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence expression of DNA repair genes.
Epigenetic alterations involved in the development of colorectal cancer may affect a person's response to chemotherapy.
Genomics | Epigenomics - Consensus molecular subtypes (CMS) classification of colorectal cancer was first introduced in 2015. CMS classification so far has been considered the most robust classification system available for CRC that has a clear biological interpretability and the basis for future clinical stratification and subtype-based targeted interventions.
A novel Epigenome-based Classification (EpiC) of colorectal cancer was proposed in 2021 introducing 4 enhancer subtypes in people with CRC. Chromatin states using 6 histone marks are characterized to identify EpiC subtypes. A combinatorial therapeutic approach based on the previously introduced consensus molecular subtypes (CMSs) and EpiCs could significantly enhance current treatment strategies.
Colorectal cancer diagnosis is performed by sampling of areas of the colon suspicious for possible tumor development, typically during colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, depending on the location of the lesion.It is confirmed by microscopical examination of a tissue sample.
Medical imaging - A colorectal cancer is sometimes initially discovered on CT scan.
Presence of metastases is determined by a CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. Other potential imaging tests such as PET and MRI may be used in certain cases. The latter is often used for rectal lesions to determine its local stage and to facilitate preoperative planning.
The histopathologic characteristics of the tumor are reported from the analysis of tissue taken from a biopsy or surgery. A pathology report contains a description of the microscopical characteristics of the tumor tissue, including both tumor cells and how the tumor invades into healthy tissues and finally if the tumor appears to be completely removed. The most common form of colon cancer is adenocarcinoma, constituting between 95% to 98% of all cases of colorectal cancer. Other, rarer types include lymphoma, adenosquamous and squamous cell carcinoma. Some subtypes are more aggressive. Immunohistochemistry may be used in uncertain cases.
Staging: Main article: Colon cancer staging
Staging of the cancer is based on both radiological and pathological findings. As with most other forms of cancer, tumor staging is based on the TNM system which considers how much the initial tumor has spread and the presence of metastases in lymph nodes and more distant organs. The AJCC 8th edition was published in 2018.
ent.
Hi sorry that you are experiencing these symptoms. These can be caused by so many things like haemorrhoids (I had those symptoms and weight loss and mine turned out to be haemorrhoids!). Colon cancer is more common in older people so it is unlikely that you will have it. It is important to ask an adult in your family to contact the GP so they can find out what the cause is. You'll probably have a telephone appointment first and then a face to face appointment. It is helpful to write down any important information (symptoms, when they started, if anything makes them worse, family history etc) beforehand as it is usually a 10 minute appointment so it is easy to forget stuff during the appointment. I hope everything turns out okay.
I had my colonoscopy yesterday and they took away a 20mm polyp. The consultant doing the colonoscopy said it was a precancerous polyp but sent it for a biopsy. Would he have been able to tell if it was sinister when he took it away? The nurse we spoke to afterwards said if it was anything he would have wrote it on the form and spoke to us. Don't know if I'm over worrying??
If your endoscopist suspected that your polyp was cancerous he should have informed you of his suspicions on the day of the procedure and would have written this on your report. You would also likely have already been referred to the MDT (multidisciplinary team) for management of your case too. Endoscopists are very well trained and can often spot cancers by appearance before biopsy results are even back. 
Hello and thanks for your post, The doctors sound like they have seen an area on the liver that has shown up, that needs further investigations. This does not necessarily mean that the cancer you had originally had has spread to the liver but it is something that the doctors do need to investigate. There are other reasons for shadows such as benign(not cancer) lesions. You are probably best discussing this with your doctors as they know the area that they are looking at and they will be able to tell you more. Sometimes they may decide to repeat a scan or do another type of scan or biopsy to investigate it further. I hope this helps. If you want to talk any of this through then do give one of the nurses a ring on the helpline to talk any of this through. We are here Monday to Friday 9am to 5pm and our number is Freephone 0808 800 4040.
Welcome to Cancer Chat. I'm sorry to hear you had a bit of a bad experience with the procedure and left without enough information. You may find it helpful to have a chat with one of our nurses - they may be able to advise on your question. If you'd like to do this, you can give them a call on 0808 800 4040 - Monday-Friday, 9-5. I hope you're able to find out more soon.